In this lecture, you'll learn about DTP, the Dynamic Trunking Protocol. If two Cisco switches are
cabled together, it's possible for them to automatically negotiate a trunk connection on those ports
they're connected with using Cisco's proprietary DTP, Dynamic Trunking Protocol.
It is, however, recommended not to use this to manually configure the switchports instead using
the commands that we've been using earlier in this section.
So if you want to configure a port as an access port, you use switchport mode access.
If you want to configure it as a trunk port, you use switchport mode trunk.
But if you are going to use DTP, these are the available commands.
First one is 'switchport mode dynamic auto',
so this is configured under the interface. That will form a trunk if the neighbor switch port that this
port is connected to is set to trunk or desirable. Trunk will not be formed if both sides are set to
auto, and this is the default on your switches.
So with newer switches, the default configuration is 'switchport mode dynamic auto'.
When you connect them into each other, it's set to auto in both sides, so they will not form a trunk,
it will stay as an access port.
The next option you've got is 'switchport mode dynamic desirable', that will form a trunk if the neighbor
switch,
the connection on the other side, is set to trunk, to desirable, or to auto,
and this is the default on older switches.
So with older switches, when you plug them into each other, they're set to dynamic desirable on both sides,
so they will form a trunk by default. And the last option is 'switchport nonegotiate' and that disables
DTP.
So your different options for the switchport mode, you can set it to switchport mode access, or trunk, or dynamic
auto, or dynamic
desirable. But recommended is like I said earlier, use either 'switchport mode access' where your end hosts
are plugged in, 'switchport mode trunk' where you've got another switch plugged in.
Okay, so that's it. Pretty simple.
Let's have a look at this in the lab.
The same topology again,
I've got my three switches, and right now,
I haven't configured anything at all in the lab.
So if I go on to SW1, these are all modern switches,
if I do a show interface gig0/1, that's connected to SW2, switchport,
you can see that the default is dynamic auto and this is currently an access port, because if I also look
at SW2 on the other side, I do a 'show interface gig0/1 switchport' over here,
it's also set to dynamic auto. So it doesn't form a trunk,
it stays as an access port, and to the connection from SW2 to SW3
is obviously the same because everything is just brand new, out of
the box, here.
So if I did want to use DTP to form a trunk here, what I could do is while I'm on SW2, I could
go to the interface. I'll go to global config and then 'interface gig0/1' and I'll say
'switchport mode dynamic desirable', and if the other side is set to either dynamic desirable or auto or trunk,
it will form a trunk,
and you already saw that the other side is set to auto. So you see
when I do this, it resets the interface and if I do a 'show interface gig0/1 switchport'
now, they should've formed a trunk.
I can see the administrative mode is now dynamic desirable, what I just manually set it to, and it
has now formed a trunk.
I'll just verify it by going on to SW1 as well, onto the other side, and we'll see it
reset the interface here as well
when I set it to dynamic desirable on the other side and it should have negotiated the trunk.
So if I do a 'show interface gig0/1 switchport', and there, you see it's still dynamic auto over here.
I've left it at the default, but because the other side is dynamic desirable, it has formed a trunk.
So, that was DTP.
Again, it's not recommended to use this. The recommended way to configure your trunks,
I've put this into a text editor already to save me
typing all out, you've seen this config earlier in the section.
So what I should have configured on my ports
is I don't want to use the default native VLAN at 1. It's a security issue, so I'm going
to say 'vlan 199' and create my native vlan and then on my ports that are connected to another
switch, I say 'switchport trunk encap dot1q' in case that isn't the default already, 'switchport mode trunk',
and 'switchport trunk native vlan 199'.
Okay, so that was DTP. See you in the next lecture, where we'll discuss VTP.